Provenance note for business/sorella/draft.yaml — Sorella Gelato, the v3 draft.

There was no conversation. The interview is deferred for this PoC (DECISIONS.md,
29 Aug), so the map is authored by hand from business/sorella/profile.md and
from nothing else, and this note stands where a transcript would. v1.txt is the
note for the first three sittings and v2.txt for the fourth; neither is
superseded. This note describes only what the fifth sitting added.

Nothing outside profile.md was used as a source of business fact. The sections
read are §1.5, "The same thing counted two ways", §1.6, the buying table, and
§3.4's ordering table with the paragraph at its foot that says what has no
level. §3.5 was not read and is not in this version.


WHAT THE SITTING ADDED
----------------------

Four slots on one class, IngredientOnHand, and nothing else. No new class, no
enum, no is_a edge, no fact, and no change to any slot that already existed
except the two aggregates, which each gained one line of `by`.

  ingredient_unit           Unit      a third grouping dimension
  ingredient_reorder_level  decimal   parameter, of ingredient_on_hand
  ingredient_pack_price     decimal   parameter, of ingredient_on_hand
  ingredient_stock_value    decimal   equals_expression over the two beside it

  21 classes, unchanged
 109 slots, was 105
   0 facts, unchanged

Each carries a slot_uri under the sorella: prefix, matching its own name, as
every other slot in the map does.


THE TWO CHANGES ARE NOT ONE CHANGE
----------------------------------

ingredient_unit repairs a number already known to be wrong. Without it the
compiler summed a movement in tins and a movement in kilograms into one total
and returned 5.32 for pistachio, which is six tins less 0.68 kg and is not a
quantity of anything. §1.5 has the business counting one thing in two units —
a tin sealed or open is one tin, a pallet of Base 50 is a carton and the shelf
is bags — and the map converts between them nowhere. So the unit is a dimension
of the group, and a carton and four bags are two rows. Nothing is added that
was not summed before; what changes is which rows are summed together.

The other three are a mechanism the map has never had. Every rule this map
carried before today derived from movements and from nothing else, and every
number in the log was inert: 93 parameter values were recorded and not one was
named by anything the compiler reads. ingredient_reorder_level and
ingredient_pack_price name two of them.


WHAT A PARAMETER IS, AS THE MAP WRITES IT

    annotations:
      parameter:
        value:
          of: ingredient_on_hand
          slot: item_reorder_level

`of` names one of the table's key columns; `slot` names a slot of whatever that
column ranges over, or of a class below it. The compiler joins the log on the
entity the key resolves to and reads that slot. It inherits both clocks from
the read every other cell already goes through, so a parameter's history costs
no machinery of its own: ask the question at another valid_at and the level
that stood then is what comes back.

Where nothing is stated the cell is empty, and that is the half of it that had
to be right before the map could carry the notation. §3.4 gives three of the
six items on the 16 June pallet a level and says of cocoa, chocolate and
dextrose that they have none. A nought there would be a rule the business does
not have, so those three read empty and the three that have one read 2, 2 and 4.

ingredient_stock_value is the crossing itself. Its left half, the balance, is
summed out of the movements; its right half is a number a supplier set on a day
and somebody wrote down; and the graph names both. It is where the claim this
PoC is testing either holds or does not.


WHAT WAS NOT ADDED
------------------

No conversion between units. Base 50 arrives as one carton and sits on the
shelf as four bags, and the map holds no rule turning one into ten of the other,
so a value in cartons and a value in bags stand as two rows and neither is
folded into the other. Writing the conversion would be inventing a rule; the
open line for it is in OPEN.md.

No parameter on GelatoOnHand. Its rows are grouped by flavour and format
rather than by a bought thing, and §3.4 states no number that stands on either.

No slot for the unit an order quantity is in. §3.4 says Base 50 is ordered one
carton at a time while its level is in bags, and the map has one slot for the
number and none for what the number counts. The carton is in the assertion's
note and nowhere the compiler can read.

No aggregate over a parameter, no comparison between a level and a balance, and
no violation table. A reorder level sitting beside a balance in the same row is
what a rule needs to be executable; whether the map should also say what
happens when the one falls below the other is the next question and not this
version's.
